CrossGL Translator 🌟
=====================

The CrossTL is a cornerstone of our platform, expertly bridging the gap
between CrossGL shader code and leading graphics APIs like DirectX,
Metal, and Vulkan. Whether you’re a seasoned developer or just starting
out, this tool empowers you to effortlessly translate and deploy shaders
across multiple platforms, expanding the versatility and impact of your
graphics projects.

Getting Started
---------------

-  **Introduction to CrossGL Translator:**

   -  A tool that translates CrossGL shader code into different graphics
      API languages like DirectX, Metal, and Vulkan.
   -  Designed to streamline shader development across multiple
      platforms.

-  **Core Features:**

   -  Streamlined Shader Conversion: Translates shaders directly into
      graphical languages or IR, bypassing unnecessary steps.
   -  Consistent Multi-Platform Support: Unified AST supporting multiple
      graphics APIs.
   -  Tailored Code Optimization: Optimized code for each target backend
      ensuring peak performance.

Key Features💡
==============

-  **Streamlined Shader Conversion:** Our system translates shaders
   directly into graphical languages or intermediate representations
   (IR), bypassing unnecessary steps. This approach simplifies the
   process for developers, ensuring efficiency and ease of use.

-  **Consistent Multi-Platform Support:** With a unified Abstract Syntax
   Tree (AST), our platform supports various graphics APIs, enabling
   developers to write shaders once and deploy them across multiple
   platforms seamlessly.

-  **Tailored Code Optimization:** The code generated by our system is
   highly optimized for each target backend, ensuring that shaders
   perform at their best. Whether you’re focusing on speed or resource
   efficiency, our platform delivers code that’s finely tuned for
   optimal performance.

Quick Guide to CrossTL Structure
--------------------------------

CrossTL is designed to translate CrossGL shader code into different
graphics API languages (e.g., HLSL, Metal, OpenGL). The process involves
several key steps, from lexing the input code to generating the final
output. Below is a quick guide to the structure and workflow of CrossTL:

**1. Lexical Analysis (Lexer)** - Purpose: - Breaks down the input
CrossGL shader code into a series of tokens (lexical units). - Process:
- The lexer reads the shader code and identifies keywords, operators,
identifiers, literals, etc. - Example tokens: SHADER, INPUT, OUTPUT,
VOID, MAIN, IDENTIFIER, NUMBER, etc. - Output: - A list of tokens that
represent the structure of the shader code.

**2. Syntax Analysis (Parser)** - Purpose: - Analyzes the sequence of
tokens and builds a syntactic structure known as the Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST). - Process: - The parser checks the token sequence for
grammatical correctness based on the defined grammar of CrossGL. -
Constructs the AST nodes such as ShaderNode, FunctionNode, VariableNode,
etc. - Output: - An AST that represents the hierarchical structure of
the shader code.

**3. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Construction** - Purpose: - Represents
the logical structure of the shader code in a tree format. - Process: -
AST nodes are created during parsing, each representing a syntactical
element of the shader (e.g., functions, variables, operations). - Nodes
include details about data types, operations, and relationships between
different code elements. - Output: - A complete AST that can be further
analyzed or transformed.

**4. Optimization (AST Optimization)** - Purpose: - Refines and
optimizes the AST for better performance and efficiency. - Process: -
Performs optimizations such as constant folding, dead code elimination,
and loop unrolling. - Simplifies expressions and optimizes data
structures within the AST. - Output: - An optimized AST ready for code
generation.

**5. Code Generation (CodeGen)** - Purpose: - Translates the optimized
AST into the target platform-specific shader code (HLSL, Metal, OpenGL,
etc.). - Process: - The code generation module traverses the AST and
converts it into the corresponding language’s syntax. - Handles the
conversion of functions, variables, and other shader constructs into the
target language. - Output: - Platform-specific shader code that is ready
for use in the target graphics API.

Workflow Summary
----------------

1. Lexical Analysis: Input shader code is tokenized.
2. Syntax Analysis: Tokens are parsed into an AST.
3. AST Construction: The logical structure of the shader is represented.
4. Optimization: The AST is refined for performance.
5. Code Generation: Optimized AST is converted into the target shader
   language.

This structured approach ensures that the shader code is accurately
translated and optimized for different platforms, maintaining both
performance and compatibility.

How It Works 🛠️
===============

The translator processes CrossGL shader code through several key stages,
ensuring a smooth and efficient transformation :

| **1.Parsing 🌲 :**
| The first stage in the CrossGL shader pipeline is the Parsing phase,
  where the shader code is meticulously analyzed and broken down into
  its constituent parts. This process begins with a lexical analysis,
  where the code is tokenized into manageable pieces such as keywords,
  identifiers, operators, and literals. These tokens are then passed
  through a syntactical analysis to construct the Abstract Syntax Tree
  (AST). The AST is a hierarchical, tree-like structure that represents
  the logical flow and structure of the shader code. Each node in the
  AST corresponds to a construct in the shader, such as variable
  declarations, function definitions, and control flow statements. By
  converting the code into an AST, CrossGL allows for a clear and
  organized representation of the shader’s logic, making it easier to
  perform further transformations, optimizations, and analyses. This
  structured representation serves as the foundation for all subsequent
  stages in the shader compilation process.

| **2.Intermediate Representation 🔗 :**
| After the AST is generated, the next step is to transform it into an
  Intermediate Representation (IR). The IR acts as an abstraction layer
  between the high-level CrossGL shader code and the low-level machine
  code that will eventually run on the hardware. This representation is
  designed to be both flexible and portable, allowing it to adapt to the
  specific needs of various graphics APIs like DirectX, Metal, or
  Vulkan. The IR retains the logical structure and intent of the
  original code while abstracting away platform-specific details, making
  it easier to perform optimizations and transformations that are
  crucial for efficient execution. Additionally, the IR enables the
  CrossGL system to apply uniform optimizations across different
  platforms, ensuring that the shader code remains performant regardless
  of the target environment. The IR serves as a critical stepping stone,
  bridging the gap between the high-level constructs in the shader code
  and the low-level instructions required by the graphics hardware.

| **3.Code Generation ⚙️ :**
| With the IR in place, the process moves on to the Code Generation
  stage. Here, the IR is translated into the target backend code
  specific to the chosen graphics API, whether it’s DirectX for Windows,
  Metal for macOS, or Vulkan for cross-platform compatibility. This
  stage involves mapping the abstract constructs in the IR to the
  concrete syntax and semantics of the target API. The translation
  process is designed to preserve the original intent and functionality
  of the CrossGL shader code while ensuring that it adheres to the
  conventions and requirements of the target platform. During this
  phase, the code generator also handles the integration of
  platform-specific features and optimizations, such as memory
  management, thread synchronization, and resource binding. The result
  is a backend-specific shader code that is ready to be compiled and
  executed on the target hardware, ensuring that the shader behaves
  consistently across different environments.

| **4.Optimization ⚡ :**
| Once the target backend code is generated, the Optimization phase
  begins. This stage is crucial for enhancing the performance of the
  shader, ensuring that it runs efficiently on the intended platform.
  Various optimization passes are applied to the code, each tailored to
  address specific aspects of shader execution. These optimizations may
  include reducing the number of instructions, minimizing resource usage
  (such as registers and memory), and improving data locality to enhance
  execution speed. Additionally, platform-specific optimizations are
  applied to take full advantage of the hardware capabilities, such as
  parallel processing on GPUs, efficient use of shader cores, and
  minimizing latency in data access. The goal of this stage is to
  produce a highly optimized shader that not only functions correctly
  but also delivers the best possible performance on the target
  platform.

| **5.Final Output 🎯 :**
| After all the processing and optimization stages are complete, the
  Final Output is produced. This is the fully optimized shader code,
  ready for integration into your graphics application. Whether the
  shader is destined for a game engine, a rendering pipeline, or a
  specialized graphics tool, the final output is designed to meet the
  highest standards of performance, compatibility, and reliability. The
  shader is now in a format that can be directly compiled and executed
  by the target platform, ensuring smooth deployment and execution. This
  final stage marks the culmination of the CrossGL shader pipeline,
  where all the intricate processes of parsing, intermediate
  representation, code generation, and optimization come together to
  produce a shader that is not only functional but also optimized for
  peak performance across different platforms.

Cross-Platform Bridging 🌉: From Platform-Specific to CrossGL and Back
======================================================================

CrossGL is a versatile tool that goes beyond simple translation from a
universal language to platform-specific shaders. It’s bidirectional
translation capability allows developers to seamlessly convert shaders
between platform-specific languages like HLSL, MSL, and GLSL to CrossGL
and then back again. This flexibility ensures that your shaders can be
consistently optimized, maintained, and deployed across multiple
platforms with ease.

Two-Way Conversion 🔄
---------------------

With CrossGL, you can not only convert CrossGL code into HLSL for
DirectX, MSL for Metal, or GLSL for OpenGL, but you can also take
existing shaders written in these platform-specific languages and
convert them back into the CrossGL format. This two-way conversion is
incredibly powerful for developers who want to: - **Standardize shaders
across multiple platforms:** By converting HLSL, MSL, and GLSL shaders
into CrossGL, you can unify your shader code into a single, maintainable
format, ensuring consistency and reducing redundancy. - **Optimize for
multiple platforms:** Once shaders are in the CrossGL format, they can
be re-translated into any of the supported platform-specific languages,
ensuring that they are optimized for the specific needs and performance
characteristics of each platform.

Unified Shader Management 🛠️
----------------------------

This bidirectional capability of CrossGL simplifies shader management by
allowing you to maintain a single version of your shaders in CrossGL.
From this central format, you can easily generate platform-specific
shaders for different environments or bring platform-specific shaders
into the CrossGL ecosystem for centralized management. This flexibility
makes it easier to apply updates, bug fixes, and optimizations across
all platforms without having to manually edit each shader individually.

A typical CrossGL shader consists of input, output, and the main
function. #### Example :``shader.cgl``

.. code:: python

   shader main
   {
       vertex
       {
           input vec3 position;
           output vec4 color;

           void main()
           {
               color = vec4(position, 1.0);
           }
       }

       fragment {
           input vec4 color;
           output vec4 fragColor;

           void main()
           {
               fragColor = color;
           }
       }
   }

**Translate to your desired backend :** 🔮

.. code:: python

   import crosstl

   #Translate to Metal
   metal_code = crosstl.translate('shader.cgl', backend='metal')

   #Translate to DirectX (HLSL)
   hlsl_code = crosstl.translate('shader.cgl', backend='directx')

   #Translate to OpenGL
   opengl_code = crosstl.translate('shader.cgl', backend='opengl')

Converting from HLSL to CrossGL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. write your HLSL shader (e.g., ``shader.hlsl``):

.. code:: hlsl

       struct VS_INPUT {
       float3 position : POSITION;
   };

   struct PS_INPUT {
       float4 position : SV_POSITION;
       float2 uv : TEXCOORD0;
   };

   PS_INPUT VSMain(VS_INPUT input) {
       PS_INPUT output;
       output.position = float4(input.position, 1.0);
       output.uv = input.position.xy * 10.0;
       return output;
   }

   float4 PSMain(PS_INPUT input) : SV_TARGET {
       return float4(input.uv, 0.0, 1.0);
   }

2. Convert to CrossGL:

.. code:: python

   import crosstl

   crossgl_code = crosstl.translate('shader.hlsl', backend='cgl')
   print(crossgl_code)

Converting from Metal to CrossGL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. write your Metal shader (e.g., ``shader.metal``):

.. code:: python

   #include <metal_stdlib>
   using namespace metal;

   struct VertexInput {
       float3 position [[attribute(0)]];
   };

   struct VertexOutput {
       float4 position [[position]];
       float2 uv;
   };

   vertex VertexOutput vertexShader(VertexInput in [[stage_in]]) {
       VertexOutput out;
       out.position = float4(in.position, 1.0);
       out.uv = in.position.xy * 10.0;
       return out;
   }

   fragment float4 fragmentShader(VertexOutput in [[stage_in]]) {
       return float4(in.uv, 0.0, 1.0);
   }

2. Convert to CrossGL:

.. code:: python

   import crosstl

   crossgl_code = crosstl.translate('shader.metal', backend='cgl')
   print(crossgl_code)

Converting from CrossGL to HLSL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. write your crossGL shader (e.g., ``shader.cgl``):

.. code:: python

   shader main {
       vertex {
           input vec3 position;
           output vec4 color;

           void main() {
               color = vec4(position, 1.0);
           }
       }

       fragment {
           input vec4 color;
           output vec4 fragColor;

           void main() {
               fragColor = color;
           }
       }
   }

2. Convert to HLSL:

.. code:: python

   import crosstl

   hlsl_code = crosstl.translate('shader.cgl', backend='hlsl')
   print(hlsl_code)

Converting from CrossGL to Metal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. write your crossGL shader (e.g., ``shader.cgl``):

.. code:: python

   shader main {
       vertex {
           input vec3 position;
           output vec4 color;

           void main() {
               color = vec4(position, 1.0);
           }
       }

       fragment {
           input vec4 color;
           output vec4 fragColor;

           void main() {
               fragColor = color;
           }
       }
   }

2. Convert to Metal:

.. code:: python

   import crosstl

   metal_code = crosstl.translate('shader.cgl', backend='metal')
   print(metal_code)

These examples will help you get started with CrossGL, enabling smooth
translation between different shader languages and seamless integration
of existing shaders into your CrossGL workflow. Enjoy your shader coding
journey! ☃️✨

Supported Platforms 🚀

**DirectX:** Designed specifically for Windows-based applications,
DirectX provides a robust framework for high-performance graphics and
multimedia.

**Metal:** Optimized for macOS and iOS, Metal delivers efficient and
low-overhead graphics performance, tailored to Apple’s hardware.

**Vulkan:** A versatile API for cross-platform development, Vulkan
supports a range of operating systems, including Linux and Android,
offering high-performance graphics and compute capabilities.

**OpenGL:** A widely-used, cross-platform API, OpenGL offers broad
compatibility and ease of use for developing graphics applications
across different platforms, including Windows, macOS, and Linux.
